README.md, before:

# ExplorViz as a Service

Collect your build artifacts to visualize them in ExplorViz whenever you need.

## What is this?

> [ExplorViz](https://www.explorviz.net/) is an open source research monitoring and visualization approach, which uses dynamic analysis techniques to provide a live trace visualization of large software landscapes.

[ExplorViz as a Service](https://github.com/Marco01809/EaaS-server) (EaaS) allows you to collect build artifacts and run them in ExplorViz instances on-demand.

When submitting builds to EaaS, they need to be wrapped inside a docker image that runs both the application and, if necessary, some load to create more interesting visualizations.

Take a look at [EaaS-base-image](https://github.com/Marco01809/EaaS-base-image) which helps you create such images and [EaaS-action](https://github.com/Marco01809/EaaS-action) which will submit these images to an EaaS instance. See [EaaS-demo-application](https://github.com/Marco01809/EaaS-demo-application) for a full example making use of this software.

## Build as docker image (recommended)

When building the docker image for EaaS, the entire build is done within a container and no build tools need to be installed on your system other than Docker.

Simply run the following command to create the image ready for production use:

```
$ docker build -t explorviz/eaas-server:latest -f docker/Dockerfile .
```

Because the entire build runs inside the container, dependencies might have to be downloaded on every run. This can be very time consuming during development. To prevent this, another Dockerfile is included that uses the experimental cache mount feature to permanently store downloaded dependencies. To use this file your docker daemon needs to run in experimental mode, then build the image like this:

```
$ DOCKER_BUILDKIT=1 docker build -t explorviz/eaas-server:latest -f docker/experimental.Dockerfile .
```

### Running the docker image

If you have docker-compose installed you can use the easy-to-configure `docker-compose.yml` in the docker directory. You can configure some options from there. Start the container by running:

```
$ docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml up -d
```

If you prefer to use `docker` directly, use something like

```
$ docker run -d -v /var/opt/eaas/ -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock -p 8080:8080 explorviz/eaas-server:latest
```

You can find additional options by reading the docker-compose file.

Then, open `http://localhost:8080` (or the address wherever this server is running) in your browser. Default administrator credentials are `admin`:`password`.

## Build as executable jar

To build EaaS as a jar file, all you need on your system is a Java Development Kit (JDK) version 11 or newer.

Simply run the following command to do a clean build, including running static analysis tools:

```
$ ./mvnw
```

This will download a supported version of the Maven build tool automatically. If you have a local Maven installation that you want to use, replace `./mvnw` with `mvn`. (Use **Maven 3.5** or newer)

During the build, a supported NodeJS version is also downloaded and used to build the frontend. You can prevent that and use a locally installed version of NodeJS and npm by adding the parameter `-P system-node`. (Use **NodeJS v12.15** or newer)

To create a production build, add `-P production`. The runnable jar file is created as `target/explorviz-as-a-service-<version>.jar` and can be run using `java -Dvaadin.productionMode -jar <path-to-jar>`.

(Note: If you need to specify multiple profiles with `-P`, separate them with a comma like this: `-P system-node,production`.)

### Development

During development, you might want to do incremental builds instead of clean builds every time; in this case specify the `package` goal: `./mvnw package` (this overrides the default goal of `clean verify`).

`Spring Boot DevTools` is included to support LiveReload integration with your IDE. Please check the documentation of your IDE on how to make use of this. Also check out the *Internal options* section at the bottom of `src/main/resources/application.properties` for a number of options that can help you when developing.

### Troubleshooting

If you get the following error message

> [ERROR] Failed to execute goal org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-compiler-plugin:3.8.1:compile (default-compile) on project explorviz-as-a-service: Fatal error compiling: invalid flag: --release -> [Help 1]

it means that you tried to compile EaaS with a JDK version 8 or older. Make `java` and `javac` in your `PATH` point to a JDK 11. How to do this depends on your operating systems. Alternatively, specify the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable when running maven, like this:

```
$ JAVA_HOME=/usr/lib/jvm/java-11-openjdk ./mvnw
```

(Actual paths depend on your operating system, look at `ls /usr/lib/jvm`.)

Commit message:

Add submission script and section in README

README.md, after:

# ExplorViz as a Service

Collect build artifacts of your Java application to visualize them in ExplorViz whenever you need.

## What is this?

> [ExplorViz](https://www.explorviz.net/) is an open source research monitoring and visualization approach, which uses dynamic analysis techniques to provide a live trace visualization of large software landscapes.

[ExplorViz as a Service](https://github.com/Marco01809/EaaS-server) (EaaS) allows you to collect build artifacts and run them in ExplorViz instances on-demand.

When submitting builds to EaaS, they need to be wrapped inside a docker image that runs both the application and, if necessary, some load to create more interesting visualizations. The application needs to be run with the Kieker monitoring tool to obtain records and send them to ExplorViz. The build image will be run together with ExplorViz inside a docker-compose stack, i.e. they run on the same network. The endpoint to submit Kieker records to is `analysis-service` on port `10133` (SingleSocketTcpWriter).
If you use the [EaaS-base-image](https://github.com/Marco01809/EaaS-base-image) for your build images, then you do not need to worry about configuring Kieker yourself.
The server provides a simple HTTP API to submit builds to; a shell script to build and upload images can be found in `submission/submit-eaas.sh`. You can copy this file into your repository or keep it somewhere on your CI server to run it during a build.

See [EaaS-demo-application](https://github.com/Marco01809/EaaS-demo-application) for a full example making use of this software.

## Requirements

The EaaS server must be able to create and run docker containers. By default it is expected that the server can access `/var/run/docker.sock`. This socket is also mounted inside the container when EaaS itself runs in Docker (as recommended). However, you can configure another Docker API endpoint through environment variables. Currently there is no support to make use of Docker Swarm or multiple Docker daemons.

You will need a fairly powerful machine. EaaS allows you to run multiple visualizations at the same time. We recommended 1.5 cores and 2GB RAM per running instance for ExplorViz itself when visualizing small applications. This does not include the resources used by the application in question and might not suffice for visualizing bigger applications.

When running the server behind a reverse proxy (e.g. to do SSL termination) and you are getting `The requested URL returned error: 413` from the submission script in your builds, then your reverse proxy is limiting the request body size. Docker images can get fairly large, setting this limit to `1024M` should suffice for most applications. Check the documentation of your reverse proxy.

## Build as docker image (recommended)

When building the docker image for EaaS, the entire build is done within a container and no build tools need to be installed on your system other than Docker.

Simply run the following command to create the image ready for production use:

```
$ docker build -t explorviz/eaas-server:latest -f docker/Dockerfile .
```

Because the entire build runs inside the container, dependencies might have to be downloaded on every run. This can be very time consuming during development. To prevent this, another Dockerfile is included that uses the experimental cache mount feature to permanently store downloaded dependencies. To use this file your docker daemon needs to run in experimental mode, then build the image like this:

```
$ DOCKER_BUILDKIT=1 docker build -t explorviz/eaas-server:latest -f docker/experimental.Dockerfile .
```

### Running the docker image

If you have docker-compose installed you can use the easy-to-configure `docker-compose.yml` in the docker directory. You can configure some options from there. Start the container by running:

```
$ docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml up -d
```

If you prefer to use `docker` directly, use something like

```
$ docker run -d -v /var/opt/eaas/ -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock -p 8080:8080 explorviz/eaas-server:latest
```

You can find additional options by reading the docker-compose file.

Then, open `http://localhost:8080` (or the address wherever this server is running) in your browser. Default administrator credentials are `admin`:`password`.

## Build as executable jar

To build EaaS as a jar file, all you need on your system is a Java Development Kit (JDK) version 11 or newer.

Simply run the following command to do a clean build, including running static analysis tools:

```
$ ./mvnw
```

This will download a supported version of the Maven build tool automatically. If you have a local Maven installation that you want to use, replace `./mvnw` with `mvn`. (Use **Maven 3.5** or newer)

During the build, a supported NodeJS version is also downloaded and used to build the frontend. You can prevent that and use a locally installed version of NodeJS and npm by adding the parameter `-P system-node`. (Use **NodeJS v12.15** or newer)

To create a production build, add `-P production`. The runnable jar file is created as `target/explorviz-as-a-service-<version>.jar` and can be run using `java -Dvaadin.productionMode -jar <path-to-jar>`.

(Note: If you need to specify multiple profiles with `-P`, separate them with a comma like this: `-P system-node,production`.)

### Development

During development, you might want to do incremental builds instead of clean builds every time; in this case specify the `package` goal: `./mvnw package` (this overrides the default goal of `clean verify`).

You can also run the server directly without packaging by running `./mvnw spring-boot:run`. *Spring Boot DevTools* is included to support LiveReload so changes will apply automatically while the server is running. Please check the documentation of your IDE on how to make use of this.

Also check out the *Internal options* section at the bottom of `src/main/resources/application.properties` for a number of options that can help you when developing. `eaas.docker.useDummyImplementation=true` will allow you to run the server without needing access to a docker daemon.

### Troubleshooting

If you get the following error message

> [ERROR] Failed to execute goal org.apache.maven.plugins:maven-compiler-plugin:3.8.1:compile (default-compile) on project explorviz-as-a-service: Fatal error compiling: invalid flag: --release -> [Help 1]

it means that you tried to compile EaaS with a JDK version 8 or older. Make `java` and `javac` in your `PATH` point to a JDK 11. How to do this depends on your operating systems. Alternatively, specify the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable when running maven, like this:

```
$ JAVA_HOME=/usr/lib/jvm/java-11-openjdk ./mvnw
```

(Actual paths depend on your operating system, look at `ls /usr/lib/jvm`.)
